And there's something.
Inevitably, there's a vision being put forward there in that story by me, you know, that has something to do with some belief that I've at least begun to develop in my life, that it's what we have here right now in front of us, what we're surrounded by, what's touchable, what's knowable, that really matters, and that we have to have some kind of a spiritual basis, whatever that may be.
for keeping us grounded here, and that this is where the real adventure is, this is where the real excitement is.
Whereas I think I didn't know that at an earlier time in my life, and what I wanted more than anything else was to get the hell out of myself.
Anything that would take me out of myself was where I wanted to be.
And that's who Cookson is.
That's what he has done.
That's what he's practiced throughout his life.
He's basically a pretty good guy.
I don't think he's a bad person.
He's kind of lost.
In terms of generating sympathy from the reader, though, we do have to work, I think.
I think you have to work.
I think you have to be able to put up with him.
I take him to
I'm thinking of things like, you know that old story by Flannery O'Connor called The Misfit?
Well, what I love about that story is what she said about that story somewhere, maybe in her letters, which is that even the misfit, who was like this murderer, is not in his soul a bad person, you know?
And the grandmother in that story is certainly not a bad person, though she's really a pain in the ass.
You know, she just rattles on and on and on and on.
She has all these prejudices and things.
And then what happens, what Flary O'Connor gives the misfit to say, the words that she puts in his mouth at the end of the story, is something like, I'm paraphrasing, she would have been a good woman if she'd had somebody there to shoot her every day of her life.
And that really summarized O'Connor's, you know, sort of theology in a way, as it pertains to human life.
And that has left an impression on me, and it's what I truly believe, is that we're all basically really good people, but we really need somebody to shoot us every day of our lives.
We need to get hit over the head by something.
And the experience that this character has is a kind of... It hits him hard enough over his head that it's going to be an awakening for him.
And he sort of gets it that he's got...
to make a change.
So you say clearly he is about to embark on a new spiritual... Yeah.
Do you see that clearly, where he's going?
I don't know all the particulars about how he's going to do it, and that's, you know, the sort of artistic risk that's taken in the book of having a... It's better that way, though, I think.
You know, I don't want to lead him through the particulars of his spiritual journey.
Is it the kind of thing that provides the stuff of another novel?
Well, maybe, I don't know, but maybe.
What we see him, you know, at the very end, well, you say you're not going to give away things, but, you know, he's thinking about this exploration of the Charles River.
And he even acknowledges that it's kind of overly obvious that he's going from the supernatural to the obviously natural.
Mm-hmm.
And I don't think that he's going to become a different person from exploring the Charles River, but it's a good place to start, you know, because it's an active, conscious turning away for him, you know, from these sort of dark, exciting kinds of experiences to something that is part of the natural world to which we are organically connected as people, you know.
So that's why it's a,
How about these supernatural experiences?
Is that something that you're familiar with?
Oh, not very much.
Not very much.
I'm really interested in them, and I think my interest in them over the years has been a kind of, you know, the reason he was interested in them, because they were otherworldly, literally because they were otherworldly.
And I wanted, I was so interested in escaping this world that anything that was otherworldly was intriguing to me.
You were interested in escaping this world.
Yeah.
Well, you know, in the sense that this world is my world, is me, you know, getting out of me, getting out of my world, getting out of the world, all that kind of stuff, you know.
And listen, if you don't mind jumping down.
Was it because of performance?
Me?
Yeah, anxiety.
No, I don't think it really was.
And I'm not at all certain that I would have been able to have a career as a performer, you know, even if I hadn't had stage fright, because...
Because, you know, when I was in college, I was still only at an intermediate, somewhere between advanced and intermediate level.
It presumes a level of ability, I guess.
Yes, it does.
You know, and I don't know whether I would have been able to become a concert pianist.
You know, I mean, I think I had some talent there, but I don't know if... So that just really makes good copy that that's the reason... Oh, absolutely.
You know, if it weren't for stage fright, you know... Yeah, no, it wasn't...
It was a lot of things.
I mean, it was partly just being lost.
It was somehow, you know, I mean, when I went to school to study music, it was, again, you know, to explore the possibilities for myself.
And in exploring it, I saw that this really isn't something I'm particularly interested in doing.
I think that's the best way to handle it.
Yeah.
I guess you're from Alabama.
Right.
I'm from Mobile, Alabama.
I was born and raised in Mobile, Alabama.
My parents still live there.
And you've been quoted in some pieces, and again, I have a lot of Southern papers, so I'm not particularly interested in battling the South in any way.
But you haven't lived there for a long time.
Right.
But you nevertheless continue to write about it in some aspect or another.
Yeah.
What is this, just because it's what you're familiar with?
Partly that.
You know, it's where my roots are, and like a lot of people, you know, I have a lot of ambivalent feelings about my roots.
There was a lot of emotional pain attached to growing up in the South that I think, for me, had very specific
very specifically to do with the Southern culture.
And I was coming of age down there at a time when the civil rights movement was at its height.
I had some kind of an identification.
I don't know where I got it from, but I was given it in some way.
I had some identification, some kind of empathy with the plight of blacks in a society where that wasn't so cool.
and so some of my experiences there were painful in that regard.
And I think that when I left the South as a young person, it was an active rejection of the South.
Now, in my middle age, though I haven't lived there for a long time, and I would have to think really long and hard about choosing to live there again, I miss
the connection that I imagined I would have to my roots.
And I'm thinking about trying in the near future to spend a little more time down there.
Just to see what it feels like at this point.
This will work fine.
I know the South has changed.
I know that I've changed.
And I'm interested to see what it feels like to be there again and spend some time there again.
You lived in New York, you lived in the Bay Area, you've lived here.
This is kind of a combination of following where opportunities are, I guess, education is.
Are you still teaching, by the way?
No, I'm not teaching.
I haven't taught in a long time.
Okay.
I guess, you know, I'd have to cover that ground that I read elsewhere.
You know, you've lived in the Bay Area, you lived in New York for quite some time, I guess.
And now we've been in Boston for 10 years.
And really, I mean, for me, what keeps me here is just, you know, bringing up a family here.
You know, the kids are in school and all that sort of thing.
And because I can live anywhere I want to live at this point in my life as a writer, I could be living somewhere else, but there's not any real reason for me to uproot the kids and take them somewhere else.
And, you know, it's not like some other place you've got getting
calling you off, to a siren calling you off.
Well, in some ways I do think, and I'm not sure I'm right about this, but in a lot of ways, you know, I do feel called to other places, to places that I consider.
I mean, some of this may just be the, you know, the other side of the fence, you know, the grass is greater on the other side of the fence kind of thing.
But we have here a life that's really highly functional and
feels to me really healthy.
The kids are really thriving.
We have a really healthy family.
We have good, supportive friends.
I'm involved in the kids' school to a great extent.
It's a life that really works well, and I feel like it's a really healthy life.
I wouldn't have any other way.
For all of those same reasons, it's not a life
that I feel compelled to write out of a lot.
Do you know what I mean?
You know, I mean, it's the... So, in some ways, I imagine living... Creatively, it's almost neutral.
It really is, you know, for those very reasons that it makes it a good life.
And, you know, so I do feel, you know, like...
I do feel the call sometimes of the South, you know, where I imagine it to be more colorful.
You know, most of my friends sort of think the same way that we think, and that's why they're our friends, and, you know, I'm not constantly confronting issues, nor what I want to be, but, you know what I mean, it's like, it's not, there's not, it feels a little colorless to me in terms of
of being a writer.
But that's what I'm doing right now, and I'm not inclined to change that.
Do you see yourself writing out of any kind of tradition?
No, I don't believe I do.
I mean, I don't.
I mean, the only thing that came to mind when you said tradition was that it seems to me that my fiction really is very traditional.
You know what I mean?
That's not what I mean.
Yeah, but that's not what you mean.
You know, it's conventional.
I mean, certainly though, you studied under Conroy.
I guess you get some... Were you at Iowa for a while?
No, I was never at Iowa.
You were at Stanford, right?
I was at Stanford.
Yeah, right.
But I mean, there were certain...
which is good to my view.
I mean, the minimalist stuff and all that.
Yeah, I was very frustrated by the minimalist stuff for a few years because I wasn't inclined in that direction.
And it seemed to me that that was getting lauded a lot, you know, in the industry.
The whole sort of less is more
trend that Carver was spearheading for a long time, and everybody was sort of writing stories that were Carver-esque for a while, and I felt— Did you like them?
No disrespect to Carver, but just to that, you know, maybe not to make it personal, but just that kind of writing.
Not very much.
I mean, you know, the reason so many people were trying to imitate Carver, it seemed to me, was because he did it really well.
And so it was kind of amazing when he was able to bring something off.
And almost made it look effortless.
He made it look effortless.
You know, I happened to be teaching creative writing out at Stanford during that time, and my students really wanted to imitate him.
They really enjoyed reading him.
And I could never quite get past
the feeling that there was something, that one of the reasons they liked Carver as much as they did is that it was kind of easy.
That I thought back to my studying piano when I was a kid, and I discovered a book of pieces, and I'd bring them in at my music teacher, and I'd say, I really love these pieces, and I'd play them, and I really loved them, and I'd tell her I really loved them, and she'd sort of smile and say, you know why you love them.
And I'd say, why?
And she'd say, because they're easy.
And I sort of felt that way about in my students' relationship to Carver during the time, was because I don't believe that what he was doing was easy.
But I believe he made it look easy in a way that made them feel that they could imitate it.
And it was very hard to put your finger on why he was succeeding when he succeeded, and they were not succeeding at trying to do the same thing.
And, you know, I mean, the stories of his that I read... That's my quote.
I love that quote.
I just love the quote.
You know why you love them?
Because they're easy?
Is that what you mean?
For the whole thing.
Oh, okay.
Very hard to put my finger on.
Yeah.
Well, and it seemed to me that a lot of...
Ray's stories left me feeling kind of flat, left me feeling a little cold.
Some of them just blew me away.
But then there were these times when I felt like, well, that didn't really accomplish very much.
It seems to me that nothing was revealed here that I could really sink my teeth into.
It seemed to me that after a while, they accumulated in such a way that left me feeling a little frustrated.
You know, the whole thing about characters not being able to communicate with each other just didn't wear very well after a while, it seemed to me.
Because after a while, you wanted to yell at them, you know, why don't you say what you feel here, you know?
So, I don't know, you know, I feel like I appreciated the work.
But I didn't resonate with the sensibility in it.
I mean, one of his things was, you know, quick in and quick out.
Well, I just, that was not my experience of writing.
My experience of writing was very slowly and tortuously in and very slowly and tortuously out.
Are you a rewriter?
Are you a tireless rewriter?
Do you revise a lot?
Yeah, and I do most of it as I go.
Do you work on a computer?
Yes, I do.
Yeah.
Thank God, because I do so much revising as I go, but that just makes that process so much easier.
So there are no variant drafts that exist, probably, in your work?
Do you print stuff out first, don't you?
Yeah, there are some variant drafts, but really, for the most part, one sentence builds on the next sentence, builds on the next sentence, and so by the time...
I'm done with what I consider to be a first draft.
It's pretty polished.
And that's the computer.
That's writing with the computer.
Yeah, that's part of it, but it's also the way that I write.
I just, for some reason, I have to get it right before I go to the next one.
I can't go on to sentence two until I'm happy with sentence one.
Exactly, yeah.
And that's just the way it is.
Right, yeah.
The variant draft that exists exists because I think that I'm done, and though it feels polished to me,
perhaps when I send it in, they say, gee, this doesn't really work.
And so then, well, I have to go through, you know, the heartache of realizing that I'm going to have to go back in and do more work.
And once I get past that, I go back in and I do the more work, you know.
You mentioned the wife and kids.
Just for biographical purposes, did you name your wife and the children and how old they are?
Sure.
My wife's name is Michelle Simons.
S-I-M-O-S.
Right.
Michelle, M-I-C-H-E-L-L-E.
That's right.
And we have two kids.
We've been married for, I think, 16 years.
We have two kids, Catherine, who... With a K. Catherine with a K, and I really do have to spell this for you.
It's K-A-T-H-A-R-I-N-E.
Like Hepburn?
Yes, like Hepburn.
And she's 12.
She's 12.
And I have a son, Sam.
Samuel is Sam.
Well, his name is Samuel, but we call him Sam.
Sometimes I call him Shmooey.
And he is seven.
And the Dalmatian is rugby.
That's right.
And your wife's a writer, I think you said.
My wife is a writer.
She was a poet for a number of years.
She never published a book of poetry, but she published individual poems a lot.
She sort of went away from writing poetry for a number of years, and now she is completing her first novel.
And you met her, I think, in school someplace?
We met at Goddard in graduate school, yeah.
And what are you working on now?
Well, I'm working on working on something, and I'm trying to get something new started.
Do you have a contract?
No, I don't have a contract for a new book.
I like to get something going before I ask for a contract.
That's not like a two-book contract.
No.
Yeah.
I mean, my rule so far has been 100 pages, and then I sell it.
Wow.
I may run out of money this time around and may have to try to get some money from somebody before I have 100 pages.
But it's been a hard time to try to get something going because in addition to the insanity of being about to publish the book, we are also moving.
The rule, what, this 100 pages?
Did you apply this for the first book as well?
No, the first book I had to write the whole thing.
Obviously, but that was completed work.
Yes.
And then starting with the second book,
The School for the Blind, I waited until I had a hundred pages before I sold it.
And with a face at the window, I waited until I had a hundred pages before I sold it.
Good.
Yeah.
Have I missed anything that you can think of?
There's a question I always like.
I mean, because it's three novels, do you see yourself as creating a corpus of work?
Maybe in Gordimer once, when I interviewed her once, she said that her work she sees is like, she compares it to going in and looking at a sculpture, and there's one sculpture in the middle of the room, which for her, every book is like walking around and looking at it from a different angle and seeing different things.
And I guess the suggestion is it's all one big thing, looking at it from different angles.
Maybe that applies to her.
Does something like that apply to you?
Well, it doesn't feel to me like that it applies to me yet.
First of all, every book in your mind is completely different.
No, it doesn't mean that.
It doesn't mean to me that every book is different.
I see that there are recurrent themes in the work.
I can already see that.
The simple truth for me is that I don't feel like three books is enough yet for me to be thinking in terms of a corpus.
It just
So while I'm sort of... Presumptuous, perhaps.
Yeah, it feels a little presumptuous to me.
I don't take myself very seriously in those ways at this point.
And whether I ever will, I don't know.
But though I'm aware of recurrent themes and so on and so forth, I haven't spent a lot of time thinking about that.
I haven't read the books, for example.
Yeah.
I haven't gone back and re-read The Music Room.
Really?
I haven't gone back and re-read School for the Blind since I finished writing them.
So, you know, it's just not a way that I'm spending my time.
But I am, yeah.
Yeah, you know, I mean, someday I may feel inclined to do that.
I have to say with my own book, it was really something that, I forget why, but I wound up reading two or three chapters a couple weeks ago.
Yeah, right.
And I'm talking to one all the time.
Uh-huh.
And I was looking for something, and I said, gee, this is pretty good.
But it had been like a year and a half,
It's like, let it, you know.
Right.
But, you know, you know it so intimately.
I mean, the point where you can almost recite it.
Yeah.
Why go back and read something?
But when you do, I guess you are kind of a little bit surprised.
Yeah.
Well, I think that that's part of it.
I mean, for me, you know, I'm aware, for example, that in my memory, I am gradually forgetting the music room.
You know, there's less and less of it that I can literally remember.
Really?
Yeah.
And so...
At the point that I have, I mean, it's just like a movie.
I mean, you know, I see a movie, and I love a movie, and somewhere down the line, I realize that, gee, I think I like that movie, but I don't remember it.
Then I would be interested in seeing it again.
Which we do often.
Yes, exactly.
So that's the way I feel about the music room, is when I have sufficiently forgotten it, it might be interesting to me to read it.
And even beyond the title, of course, your background,
Yeah.
I think so, though again I'm not sure how much of that was conscious at the time and how much of it was unconscious.
But surely I was influenced by my education in composition.
Probably still am.
that you didn't read a lot growing up?
I didn't read a lot growing up, and I still don't read a lot.
I'm just not a reader.
You know, I'm not one of those people.
I'm not like you.
I could never write a book called, you know, on bibliomania, because it's not something I experienced.
It took eight years of research, too.
Yeah, right.
But, you know, I'm not, that's not something that I,
I'm proud of I would have it otherwise I really would I feel like I'd be a better writer if I read more but it doesn't come easy to me reading and you're a slow reader I'm a slow reader and the concept of reading for pleasure is not a concept that I grasp when I'm reading for some reason it feels like work and it's hard for me to sit still with it for long periods of time
I feel a little restless when I read.
And so I don't know what all the reasons for that are, that reading is difficult for me.
But it remains difficult for me, and that's why I don't read a lot.
And I wish I read more.
And I notice in all three of the books, you do have acknowledgments, you thank people.
Yeah.
And a lot of people are the same people.
or is this basically for informational kind of thing?
No, the only person I show my work to is my wife.
She's my first and only critic, editor, and then I turn it in to my real editor, and that's it.
And deal with it from there.
Yeah, no, the people that I acknowledge and that I thank in my books are people who have helped me with information that I needed and things like that.
In some cases...
People gave me a place to work, you know, when I needed to get away for a few days.
And then, you know, the reason people crop up more than once is because, you know, my lawyer friend, when I have a legal question, that's who I call up, you know.
There's a detective in there or something.
Yeah, you know.
So there are people I call up for medical questions and people I call up for legal questions and things like that.
quotes with you too.
Thank you.